CHAPTER  NINE
MECHANICAL  PROPERTIES  OF FLUIDS
9.1 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter , we shall study  some common physical
properties of liquids and gases. Liquids and gases can  flow
and are ther efore, called  fluids.  It is this pr operty that
distinguishes liquids and gases fr om solids in a basic way.
Fluids ar e everywher e around us. Earth has an envelop of
air and two-thir ds of its sur face is cover ed with water .  Water
is not only necessary for our existence; every mammalian
body constitute mostly of water . All the  pr ocesses occurring
in living beings including plants ar e mediated by fluids. Thus
understanding the behaviour and pr operties of fluids is
important.
How ar e fluids dif ferent fr om solids? What is common in
liquids and gases? Unlike  a solid, a fluid has no definite
shape of its own. Solids and liquids have a fixed volume,
wher eas a gas fills the entir e volume of its container . We
have lear nt in the pr evious chapter that the volume of solids
can be changed by str ess. The volume of solid, liquid or gas
depends on the str ess or pr essur e acting on it. When we
talk about fixed volume of solid or liquid, we mean its volume
under atmospheric pr essur e. The dif ference between gases
and solids or liquids is that for solids or liquids the change
in volume due to  change of exter nal pr essur e is rather small.
In other wor ds solids and liquids have much lower
compr essibility as compar ed to gases.
Shear str ess can change the shape of a solid keeping its
volume fixed. The key pr operty of fluids is that they of fer
very little r esistance to shear str ess; their shape changes by
application of very small shear str ess. The shearing str ess
of fluids is about million times smaller than that of solids.
9.2  PRESSURE
A sharp needle when pressed against our skin pierces it. Our
skin, however , remains intact when a blunt object with a
wider contact ar ea (say the back of a spoon) is pr essed against
it with the same for ce. If an elephant wer e to step on a man’s
chest, his ribs would crack. A cir cus per former acr oss whose9.1 Introduction
9.2 Pressure
9.3 Streamline flow
9.4 Bernoulli’s principle
9.5 Viscosity
9.6 Surface tension
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
Additional exercises
Appendix
Reprint 2025-26

chest a large, light but strong wooden plank is
placed first, is saved fr om this accident. Such
everyday experiences convince us that both the
force and its coverage ar ea are important. Smaller
the ar ea on which the for ce acts, gr eater is the
impact. This impact is known  as pressure.
When an object is submer ged in a fluid at
rest, the fluid exerts a for ce on its sur face. This
force is always nor mal to the object’s sur face.
This is so because if ther e wer
e a component of
force parallel to the sur face, the object will also
exert a for ce on the fluid parallel to it; as a
consequence of Newton’s thir d law. This for ce
will cause the fluid to flow parallel to the sur face.
Since the fluid is at r est, this cannot happen.
Hence, the for ce exerted by the fluid at r est has
to be perpendicular to the sur face in contact
with it. This is shown in Fig.9.1(a).
The nor mal for ce exerted by the fluid at a point
may be measur ed. An idealised for m of one such
pressure-measuring device is shown in Fig.
9.1(b). It consists of an evacuated chamber with
a spring that is calibrated to measur e the for ce
acting on the piston. This device is placed at a
point inside the fluid. The inwar d force exerted
by the fluid on the piston is balanced by the
outwar d spring for ce and is ther eby measur ed.
If F is the magnitude of this nor mal for ce on the
piston of area A then the average pressure  Pav
is defined as the nor mal for ce acting per unit
area.
PF
Aav=              (9.1)In principle, the piston area can be made
arbitrarily small. The pr essur e is then defined
in a limiting sense as
P = lim
∆A 0→Δ
ΔF
A(9.2)
Pressur e is a scalar quantity. W e remind the
reader that it is the component of the for ce
normal to the ar ea under consideration and not
the (vector) for ce that appears in the numerator
in Eqs. (9.1) and (9.2). Its dimensions are
[ML–1T–2]. The SI unit of pr essur e is N m–2. It has
been named as pascal (Pa) in honour of the
French scientist Blaise Pascal (1623-1662) who
carried out pioneering studies on fluid pr essur e.
A common unit of pr essur e is the atmospher e
(atm), i.e. the pr essur e exerted by the
atmospher e at sea level (1 atm = 1.013 × 105 Pa).
Another quantity, that is indispensable in
describing fluids, is the density ρ. For a fluid of
mass m occupying volume V,
ρ=m
V(9.3)
The dimensions of density are [ML–3]. Its SI
unit is kg m–3. It is a positive scalar quantity. A
liquid is lar gely incompr essible and its density
is ther efore, nearly constant at all pr essur es.
Gases, on the other hand exhibit a lar ge
variation in densities with pr essur e.
The density of water at 4oC (277 K) is
1.0 × 103 kg m–3. The r elative density of a
substance is the ratio of its density to the
density of water at 4oC. It is a dimensionless
positive scalar quantity. For example the r elative
density of aluminium is 2.7. Its density is
2.7 × 103 kg m–3
.  The densities of some common
fluids are displayed in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1 Densities of some common fluids
at STP*
 (a) (b)
Fig. 9.1 (a) The force exerted by the liquid in the
beaker on the submerged object or on the
walls is nor mal (perpendicular) to the
surface at all points.
(b) An idealised device for measuring
pressur e.
*STP means standar d temperatur e (00C) and 1 atm pr essur e.MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 181
Reprint 2025-26

182 PHYSICS⊳Example 9.1   The two thigh bones (femurs),
each of cross-sectional area10 cm2 support
the upper part of a human body of mass 40
kg. Estimate the average pressure
sustained by the femurs.
Answer   Total cr oss-sectional ar ea of the
femurs is A = 2 × 10 cm2 = 20 × 10–4 m2. The
force acting on them is F = 40kg wt = 400 N
(taking g = 10 m s–2). This for ce is acting
vertically down and hence, nor mally on the
femurs. Thus, the average pr essur e is
2 5m  N  10   2     −× = =AFPav                             ⊳
9.2.1 Pascal’s Law
The French scientist Blaise Pascal observed that
the pr essur e in a fluid at r est is the same at all
points if they ar e at the same height. This fact
may be demonstrated in a simple way.
Fig. 9.2 shows an element in the interior of a
fluid at rest. This element ABC-DEF is in the
form of a right-angled prism. In principle, this
prismatic element is very small so that every
part of it can be consider ed at the same depth
from the liquid sur face and ther efore, the ef fect
of the gravity is the same at all these points.
But for clarity we have enlar ged this element.
The for ces on this element ar e those exerted by
the rest of the fluid and they must be nor mal to
the sur faces of the element as discussed above.
Thus, the fluid exerts pr essur es Pa, Pb and Pc onthis element of area corresponding to the normal
forces Fa, Fb and Fc as shown in Fig. 9.2 on the
faces BEFC, ADFC and ADEB denoted by Aa, Ab
and Ac respectively. Then
Fb sinθ = Fc,Fb cosθ = Fa(by equilibrium)
Ab sinθ = Ac,Ab cosθ = Aa(by geometry)
Thus,
;b c a
b c a
b c aF F FP P PA A A= = = =(9.4)
Hence, pressure exerted is same in all
directions in a fluid at r est. It again r eminds us
that like other types of str ess, pr essur e is not a
vector quantity. No dir ection can be assigned
to it.  The for ce against any ar ea within (or
bounding) a fluid at r est and under pr essur e is
normal to the ar ea, regardless of the orientation
of the ar ea.
Now consider a fluid element in the for m of a
horizontal bar of unifor m cross-section. The bar
is in equilibrium. The horizontal for ces exerted
at its two ends  must be balanced or the
pressur e at the two ends should be equal. This
proves that for a liquid in equilibrium the
pressur e is same at all points in a horizontal
plane. Suppose the pr essur e wer e not equal in
different parts of the fluid, then ther e would be
a flow as the  fluid will have some net for ce
acting on it. Hence in the absence of flow the
pressure in the fluid must be same everywhere
in a horizontal plane.
9.2.2 Variation of Pressure with Depth
Consider a fluid at r est in a container . In
Fig. 9.3 point 1 is at height h above a point 2.
The pr essur es at points 1 and 2 ar e P1 and P2
respectively. Consider a cylindrical element of
fluid having ar ea of base A and height h. As the
fluid is at r est the r esultant horizontal for ces
should be zer o and the r esultant vertical for ces
should balance the weight of the element. The
forces acting in the vertical dir ection ar e due to
the fluid pr essur e at the top ( P1A) acting
downwar d, at the bottom ( P2A) acting upwar d.
If mg is weight of the fluid in the cylinder we
have
(P2 − P1) A = mg (9.5)
Now, if ρ is the mass density of the fluid, we
have the mass of fluid to be m = ρV= ρhA so
that
P2 − P1=  ρgh (9.6)Fig. 9.2 Proof of Pascal’s law. ABC-DEF is an
element of the interior of a fluid at r est.
This element is in the for m of a right-
angled prism. The element is small so that
the ef fect of gravity can be ignor ed, but it
has been enlar ged for the sake of clarity.
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 183⊳
Fig.9.3 Fluid under gravity. The effect of gravity is
illustrated through pressure on a vertical
cylindrical column.
Pressur e difference depends on the vertical
distance h between the points (1 and 2), mass
density of the fluid ρ and acceleration due to
gravity g. If the point 1 under discussion is
shifted to the top of the  fluid (say, water), which
is open to the atmospher e, P1 may be r eplaced
by atmospheric pr essur e (Pa) and we r eplace P2
by P. Then Eq. (9.6) gives
P = Pa + ρgh (9.7)
Thus, the pr essur e P, at depth below the
surface of a liquid open to the atmospher e is
greater than atmospheric pr essur e by an
amount ρgh. The excess of pr essur e, P − Pa, at
depth h is called a gauge pressure  at that point.
The ar ea of the cylinder is not appearing in
the expression of absolute pressure in Eq. (9.7).
Thus, the height of the fluid column is important
and not cros s-sectional or base area or the shape
of the container . The liquid pressur e is the same
at all points at the same horizontal level (same
depth).  The result is appreciated through the
example of hydrostatic paradox . Consider three
vessels A, B and C  [Fig.9.4] of different shapes.
They are connected at the bottom by a horizontal
pipe. On filling with water , the level in the thr ee
vessels is the same, though they hold different
amounts of water . This is so because water at
the bottom has the same pressure below each
section of the vessel.Fig 9.4 Illustration of hydrostatic paradox. The
three vessels A, B and C contain dif ferent
amounts of liquids, all upto the same
height.
Example 9.2 What is the pressure on a
swimmer 10 m below the sur face of a lake?
Answer  Here
h = 10 m  and ρ = 1000 kg m-3. Take g = 10 m s–2
From Eq. ( 9.7)
P = Pa + ρgh
   = 1.01 × 105 Pa + 1000 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2 × 10 m
   = 2.01 × 105 Pa
    ≈ 2 atm
This is a 100% incr ease in pr essur e from
surface level. At a depth of 1 km, the increase
in pressure is 100 atm! Submarines are designed
to withstand such enormous pressures.   ⊳
9.2.3 Atmospheric Pressure and
Gauge Pressure
The pressure of the atmosphere at any point is
equal to the weight of a column of air of unit
cross-sectional area extending from that point
to the top of the atmosphere. At sea level, it is
1.013 × 105 Pa (1 atm). Italian scientist
Evangelista Torricelli (160 8–1647) devised for
the first time a method for measuring
atmospheric pr essur e. A long glass tube closed
at one end and filled with mer cury is inverted
into a trough of mercury as shown in Fig. 9.5 (a).
This device is known as ‘mercury barometer’.
The space above the mercury column in the tube
contains only mercury vapour whose pressure
P is so small  that it may be neglected. Thus,
the pressure at Point A=0. The pressure inside
the coloumn at Point B must be the same as the
pressure at Point C, which is atmospheric
pressure, P a.
Pa = ρgh (9.8)
where ρ is the density of mercury and h is the
height of the mercury column in the tube.
Reprint 2025-26

184 PHYSICS
⊳⊳In the experiment it is found that the mercury
column in the barometer has a height of about
76 cm at sea level equivalent to one atmosphere
(1 atm). This can also be obtained using the
value of ρ in Eq. (9.8). A common way of stating
pressur e is in ter ms of cm or mm of mer cury
(Hg). A pr essur e equivalent of 1 mm is called a
torr (after T orricelli).
1 torr = 133 Pa.
The mm of Hg and torr ar e used in medicine
and physiology. In meteor ology, a common unit
is the bar and millibar .
1 bar = 105 Pa
An open tube manometer is a useful
instrument for measuring pressure differences.
It consists of a U-tube containing a suitable
liquid i.e., a low density liquid (such as oil) for
measuring small pressure differences and a
high density liquid (such as mercury) for large
pressure differences. One end of the tube is open
to the atmosphere and the other end is
connected to the system whose pressure we want
to measure [see Fig. 9.5 (b)]. The pressure P at A
is equal to pressure at point B. What we
normally measure is the gauge pressure, which
is P − Pa, given by Eq. (9.8) and is proportional to
manometer height h.Pressure is same at the same level on both
sides of the U-tube containing a fluid. For
liquids, the density varies very little over wide
ranges in pressure and temperature and we can
treat it safely as a constant for our present
purposes. Gases on the other hand, exhibits
large variations of densities with changes in
pressure and temperature. Unlike gases, liquids
are, therefore, largely treated as incompressible.
Example 9.3  The density of the
atmosphere at sea level is 1.29 kg/m3.
Assume that it does not change with
altitude. Then how high would the
atmosphere extend?
Answer  We use Eq. (9.7)
ρgh  =  1.29 kg m–3 × 9.8 m s2 × h  m = 1.01 ×  105 Pa
∴ h = 7989 m ≈ 8 km
In reality the density of air decreases with
height. So does the value of g. The atmospheric
cover extends with decreasing pressure over
100 km. W e should also note that the sea level
atmospheric pressure is not always 760 mm of
Hg. A drop in the Hg level by 10 mm or more is a
sign of an approaching storm. ⊳
Example 9.4  At a depth of 1000 m in an
ocean (a) what is the absolute pressure?
(b) What is the gauge pressure? (c) Find
the force acting on the window of area
20 cm × 20 cm of a submarine at this depth,
the interior of which is maintained at sea-
level atmospheric pressure. (The density of
sea water is 1.03 × 103 kg m-3,
g = 10 m s–2.)
(b) The open tube manometer
Fig 9.5   Two pressure measuring devices.
Fig 9.5 (a) The mer cury barometer .
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 185⊳Answer  Here h = 1000 m and ρ = 1.03 × 103 kg m-3.
(a)From Eq. (9.6), absolute pressure
P = Pa + ρgh
= 1.01 × 105 Pa
   + 1.03 × 103 kg m–3  × 10 m s–2 × 1000 m
=  104.01 × 105 Pa
≈ 104 atm
(b)Gauge pressure is P − Pa = ρgh = Pg
Pg = 1.03 × 103 kg m–3 × 10 ms2 × 1000 m
    = 103 × 105 Pa
     ≈ 103 atm
(c)The pressure outside the submarine is
P = Pa + ρgh and the pressure inside it is Pa.
Hence, the net pressure acting on the
window is gauge pressure, Pg = ρgh. Since
the area of the window is A = 0.04 m2, the
force acting on it is
F = Pg A = 103 × 105 Pa × 0.04 m2 = 4.12 × 105 N
  ⊳
9.2.4  Hydraulic Machines
Let us now consider what happens when we
change the pressure on a fluid contained in a
vessel. Consider a horizontal cylinder with a
piston and three vertical tubes at different points
[Fig. 9.6 (a)]. The pressure in the horizontal
cylinder is indicated by the height of liquid
column in the vertical tubes. It is necessarily
the same in all. If we push the piston, the fluid
level rises in all the tubes, again reaching the
same level in each one of them.law. In these devices, fluids are used for
transmitting pressure. In a hydraulic lift, as
shown in Fig. 9.6 (b), two pistons are separated
by the space filled with a liquid. A piston of small
cross-section  A1 is used to exert a force F1 directly
on the liquid. The pressure P = 1
1F
A is
transmitted throughout the liquid to the larger
cylinder attached with a larger piston of area A2,
which results in an upward force of P × A2.
Therefore, the piston is capable of supporting a
large for ce (lar ge weight of, say a car , or a truck,
placed  on the platform ) F2 = PA2 = 1 2
1F A
A. By
changing the force at A1, the platform can be
moved up or down. Thus, the applied force has
been increased by a factor of 2
1A
A and this factor
is the mechanical advantage of the device. The
example below clarifies it.
Fig 9.6   (a) Whenever external pressure is applied
   on any part of a fluid in a vessel, it is
equally transmitted in all directions.
     This indicates that when the pressure  on the
cylinder was increased, it was distributed
unifor mly thr oughout. W e can say  whenever
external pressure is applied on any part of a
fluid contained in a vessel, it is transmitted
undiminished and equally in all directions.
This is another form of the Pascal’s law and it
has many applications in daily life .
A number of devices, such as hydraulic lift
and hydraulic brakes,  are based on the Pascal’s
Fig 9.6 (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the principle
  behind the hydraulic lift, a device used
  to lift heavy loads.
Example 9.5  Two syringes of different
cross-sections (without needles) filled with
water are connected with a tightly fitted
rubber tube filled with water . Diameters of
the smaller piston and larger piston are
1.0 cm and 3.0 cm respectively. (a)  Find
the force exerted on  the larger piston when
a force of 10 N is applied to the smaller
piston. (b) If the smaller piston is pushed
in through 6.0 cm, how much does the
larger piston move out?
Answer  (a) Since pressure is transmitted
undiminished throughout the fluid,
Reprint 2025-26

186 PHYSICS⊳( )
( )2–2
2
2 1 2–213/2 10 m
10 N
1/2 10 mAF FAπ
π×
= = ×
×
             = 90 N
(b) W ater is consider ed to be per fectly
incompr essible. V olume cover ed by the
movement of smaller piston inwards is equal to
volume moved outwards due to the larger piston.
2 2 1 1A L A L =
       j 0.67 × 10-2 m = 0.67 cm
Note, atmospheric pressure is common to both
pistons and has been ignored. ⊳
Example 9.6  In a car lift compressed air
exerts a for ce F1 on a small piston having
a radius of 5.0 cm. This pr essur e is
transmitted to a second piston of radius
15 cm (Fig 9.7). If the mass of the car to be
lifted is 1350 kg, calculate F1. What is the
pressure necessary to accomplish this
task? ( g = 9.8 ms-2).
Answer  Since pr essur e is transmitted
undiminished throughout the fluid,
= 1470 N
≈ 1.5 × 103 N
The air pressure that will produce this
force is
This is almost double the atmospheric
pressure.                       ⊳
Hydraulic brakes in automobiles also work on
the same principle. When we apply a little force
on the pedal with our foot the master piston
moves inside the master cylinder , and the
pressure caused is transmitted through the
brake oil to act on a piston of larger area. A large
force acts on the piston and is pushed down
expanding the brake shoes against brake lining.
In this way, a small force on the pedal produces
a large retarding force on the wheel. Animportant advantage of the system is that the
pressure set up by pressing pedal is transmitted
equally to all cylinders attached to the four
wheels so that the braking effort is equal on
all wheels.
9.3  STREAMLINE FLOW
So far we have studied fluids at rest. The study
of the fluids in motion is known as fluid
dynamics. When a water tap is turned on slowly,
the water flow is smooth initially, but loses its
smoothness when the speed of the outflow is
increased. In studying the motion of fluids, we
focus our attention on what is happening to
various fluid particles at a particular point in
space at a particular time. The flow of the fluid
is said to be steady  if at any given point, the
velocity of each passing fluid particle remains
constant in time. This does not mean that the
velocity at different points in space is same. The
velocity of a particular particle may change as it
moves fr om one point to another . That is, at some
other point the particle may have a different
velocity, but every other particle which passes
the second point behaves exactly as the previous
particle that has just passed that point. Each
particle follows a smooth path, and the paths of
the particles do not cr oss each other .
Fig. 9.7 The meaning of streamlines. (a) A typical
trajectory of a fluid particle.
(b) A region of streamline flow.
The path taken by a fluid particle under a
steady flow is a streamline . It is defined as a
curve whose tangent at any point is in the
direction of the fluid velocity at that point.
Consider the path of a particle as shown in
Fig.9.7 (a), the curve describes how a fluid
particle moves with time. The curve PQ is like a
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 187
permanent map of fluid flow, indicating how the
fluid streams. No two streamlines can cross, for
if they do, an oncoming fluid particle can go
either one way or the other and the flow would
not be steady. Hence, in steady flow, the map of
flow is stationary in time. How do we draw closely
spaced streamlines ? If we intend to show
streamline of every flowing particle, we would
end up with a continuum of lines. Consider planes
perpendicular to the direction of fluid flow e.g.,
at thr ee points P , R and Q in Fig. 9.7 (b).  The plane
pieces are so chosen that their boundaries be
determined by the same set of streamlines. This
means that number of fluid particles crossing
the sur faces as indicated at P , R and Q is the
same. If area of cross-sections at these points
are AP,AR and AQ and speeds of fluid particles
are vP, vR and vQ, then mass of fluid ∆mP crossing
at AP in a small interval of time ∆t is ρPAPvP ∆t.
Similarly mass of fluid ∆mR flowing or crossing
at AR in a small interval of time ∆t is  ρRARvR ∆t
and mass of fluid  ∆mQ is ρQAQvQ ∆t crossing at
AQ. The mass of liquid flowing out equals the
mass flowing in, holds in all cases. Therefore,
ρPAPvP∆t = ρRARvR∆t = ρQAQvQ∆t (9.9)
For flow of incompressible fluids
ρP = ρR = ρQ
Equation (9.9) reduces to
APvP = ARvR = AQvQ(9.10)
which is called the equation of continuity  and
it is a statement of conservation of mass in flow
of incompressible fluids. In general
Av = constant (9.11)
Av gives the volume flux or flow rate and
remains constant throughout the pipe of flow.
Thus, at narrower portions where the
streamlines are closely spaced, velocity
increases and its vice versa. From (Fig 9.7b) it
is clear that AR  > AQ or   vR <  vQ, the fluid is
accelerated while passing from R to Q. This is
associated with a change in pressure in fluid
flow in horizontal pipes.
Steady flow is achieved at low flow speeds.
Beyond a limiting value, called critical speed,
this flow loses steadiness and becomes
turbulent . One sees this when a fast flowing
stream encounters rocks, small foamy
whirlpool-like regions called ‘white water
rapids are formed.
Figure 9.8 displays streamlines for some
typical flows. For example, Fig. 9.8(a) describes
a laminar flow where the velocities at different
points in the fluid may have different magnitudesbut their directions are parallel. Figure 9.8 (b)
gives a sketch of turbulent flow.
Fig. 9.8 (a) Some streamlines for fluid flow.
(b) A jet of air striking a flat plate placed
perpendicular to it. This is an example
of turbulent flow.
9.4  BERNOULLI’S PRINCIPLE
Fluid flow is a complex phenomenon. But we
can obtain some useful properties for steady
or streamline flows using the conservation
of energy.
Consider a fluid moving in a pipe of varying
cross-sectional ar ea. Let the pipe be at varying
heights as shown in Fig. 9.9. W e now suppose
that an incompr essible fluid is flowing thr ough
the pipe in a steady flow. Its velocity must
change as a consequence of equation of
continuity. A force is required to produce this
acceleration, which is caused by the fluid
surrounding it, the pressure must be different
in different regions. Bernoulli’s equation is a
general expression that relates the pressure
difference between two points in a pipe to both
velocity changes (kinetic energy change) and
elevation (height) changes (potential energy
change). The Swiss Physicist Daniel Bernoulli
developed this relationship in 1738.
Consider the flow at two regions 1 (i.e., BC)
and 2 (i.e., DE). Consider the fluid initially lying
between B and D. In an infinitesimal time
interval ∆t, this fluid would have moved. Suppose
v1 is the speed at B and v2 at D, then fluid initially
at B has moved a distance v1∆t to C ( v1∆t is small
enough to assume constant cross-section along
BC). In the same interval ∆t the fluid initially at
D moves to E, a distance equal to v2∆t. Pressures
P1 and P2 act as shown on the plane faces of
areas A1 and A2 binding the two regions. The
work done on the fluid at left end (BC) is W1 =
P1A1(v1∆t) = P1∆V. Since the same volume ∆V
passes through both the regions (from the
equation of continuity) the work done by the fluid
at the other end (DE) is W2 = P2A2(v2∆t) = P2∆V or,
Reprint 2025-26

188 PHYSICS
the work done on the fluid is  – P2∆V. So the total
work done on the fluid is
W1 – W2 =  (P1− P2) ∆V
Part of this work goes into changing the kinetic
energy of the fluid, and part goes into changing
the gravitational potential energy. If the density
of the fluid is ρ and ∆m = ρA1v1∆t = ρ∆V is the
mass passing through the pipe in time ∆t, then
change in gravitational potential energy is
∆U = ρg∆V (h2 − h1)
The change in its kinetic energy is
∆K = 1
2       ρ ∆V (v22 − v12)
We can employ the work – ener gy theor em
(Chapter 6) to this volume of the fluid and
this yields
(P1− P2) ∆V = 1
2       ρ ∆V (v22 − v12) + ρg∆V (h2 − h1)
We now divide each ter m by ∆V to obtain
(P1− P2) = 1
2       ρ (v22 − v12) + ρg (h2 − h1)
We can r earrange the above ter ms to obtain
P1 + 1
2       ρv12 + ρgh1 = P2+ 1
2       ρv22 + ρgh2
     (9.12)
This is Bernoulli’s equation . Since 1 and 2
refer to any two locations along the pipeline, we
may write the expression in general as
 P + 1
2      ρv2 + ρgh = constant (9.13)In words, the Bernoulli’s relation may be
stated as follows: As we move along a streamline
the sum of the pressure ( P), the kinetic energy
per unit volume ρv2
2

 and the potential energy
per unit volume ( ρgh) remains a constant.
Note that in applying the energy conservation
principle, there is an assumption that no energy
is lost due to friction. But in fact, when fluids
flow, some energy does get lost due to internal
friction. This arises due to the fact that in a fluid
flow, the different layers of the fluid flow with
different velocities. These layers exert frictional
forces on each other resulting in a loss of energy.
This property of the fluid is called viscosity and
is discussed in more detail in a later section. The
lost kinetic energy of the fluid gets converted into
heat energy. Thus, Bernoulli’s equation ideally
applies to fluids with zero viscosity or non-
viscous fluids. Another restriction on application
of Bernoulli theorem is that the fluids must be
incompressible, as the elastic energy of the fluid
is also not taken into consideration. In practice,
it has a large number of useful applications and
can help explain a wide variety of phenomena
for low viscosity incompressible fluids.
Bernoulli’s equation also does not hold for non-
steady or turbulent flows, because in that
situation velocity and pressure are constantly
fluctuating in time.
When a fluid is at rest i.e., its velocity is zero
everywhere, Bernoulli’s equation becomes
P1 + ρgh1 = P2 + ρgh2
(P1− P2) = ρg (h2 − h1)
which is same as Eq. (9.6).
9.4.1 Speed of Efflux: Torricelli’s Law
The word efflux means fluid outflow. Torricelli
discover ed that the speed of ef flux fr om an open
tank is given by a formula identical to that of a
freely falling body. Consider a tank containing
a liquid of density ρ with a small hole in its side
at a height y1 from the bottom (see Fig. 9.10).
The air above the liquid, whose surface is at
height y2, is at pr essur e P. From the equation of
continuity [Eq. (9.10)] we have
v1 A1 = v2 A2
vA
Av21
2=1Fig. 9.9 The flow of an ideal fluid in a pipe of varying
cross section. The fluid in a section of length
v1∆t moves to the section of length v2∆t in
time ∆t.
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 189
If the cross-sectional area of the tank A2 is
much larger than that of the hole ( A2 >>A1), then
we may take the fluid to be approximately at rest
at the top, i.e., v2 = 0. Now, applying the Bernoulli
equation at points 1 and 2 and noting that at
the hole P1 = Pa, the atmospheric pressure, we
have from Eq. (9.12)
2
1 1 21
2aP  v g y P g y             + ρ + ρ = +ρ
Taking  y2 – y1 = h we have
( )22a
1P Pv g h     −= +ρ(9.14)
When P >>Pa and 2 g h may be ignored, the
speed of efflux is determined by the container
pressure. Such a situation occurs in rocket
propulsion. On the other hand, if the tank is
open to the atmosphere, then P  = Pa and
h g v   21= (9.15)
This is also the speed of a freely falling body.
Equation (9.15) represents Torricelli’s law .
9.4.2 Dynamic Lift
Dynamic lift is the force that acts on a body,
such as airplane wing, a hydrofoil or a spinning
ball, by virtue of its motion through a fluid.  In
many games such as cricket, tennis, baseball,
or golf, we notice that a spinning ball deviatesfrom its parabolic trajectory as it moves through
air. This deviation can be partly explained on
the basis of Bernoulli’s principle.
(i)Ball moving without spin : Fig. 9.11(a)
shows the streamlines around a
non-spinning ball moving relative to a
fluid. From the symmetry of streamlines
it is clear that the velocity of fluid (air)
above and below the ball at corresponding
points is the same resulting in zero
pressure difference. The air therefore,
exerts no upward or downward force on
the ball.
(ii)Ball moving with spin : A ball which is
spinning drags air along with it. If the
surface is rough more air will be dragged.
Fig 9.11(b) shows  the streamlines of air
for a ball which is moving and spinning
at the same time. The ball is moving
forward and relative to it the air is moving
backwards. Therefore, the velocity of air
above the ball relative to the ball is larger
and below it is smaller (see Section 9.3).
The stream lines, thus, get crowded above
and rarified below.
This difference in the velocities of air results
in the pressure difference between the lower and
upper faces and there is a net upward force on
the ball. This dynamic lift due to spining is called
Magnus effect .
Aerofoil or lift on aircraft wing:  Figure 9.11
(c) shows an aerofoil, which is a solid piece
shaped to provide an upward dynamic lift
when it moves horizontally thr ough air . The
cross-section of the wings of an aeroplane
looks somewhat like the aerofoil shown in Fig.
9.11 (c) with streamlines around it. When the
aerofoil moves against the wind, the
orientation of the wing relative to flow direction
causes the streamlines to crowd together
above the wing more than those below it. The
flow speed on top is higher than that below it.
There is an upward force resulting in a
dynamic lift of the wings and this balances
the weight of the plane. The following example
illustrates this.Fig. 9.10 Torricelli’s law. The speed of efflux, v1,
from the side of the container is given by
the application of Ber noulli’s equation.
If the container is open at the top to the
atmospher e then 1  2  hv g= .
Reprint 2025-26

190 PHYSICS⊳
Example 9.7  A fully loaded Boeing aircraft
has a mass of 3.3 × 105 kg. Its total wing
area is 500 m2. It is in level flight with a
speed of 960 km/h. (a) Estimate the
pressure difference between the lower and
upper surfaces of the wings (b) Estimate
the fractional increase in the speed of the
air on the upper surface of the wing relative
to the lower surface. [The density of air is ρ
= 1.2 kg m-3]
Answer  (a) The weight of the Boeing aircraft is
balanced by the upward force due to the
pressure difference
∆P × A = 3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8
P∆= (3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8 m s–2) / 500 m2
      = 6.5 ×103 Nm-2
(b) W e ignor e the small height dif ference
between the top and bottom sides in Eq. (9.12).
The pressure difference between them is
then
ΔP v v=( )ρ
222
12–
where v2 is the speed of air over the upper
surface and v1 is the speed under the bottom
surface.
v vP
v v2 1
2 12–()=+( )Δ
ρ
Taking the average speed(a) (b) (c)
Fig 9.11 (a) Fluid streaming past a static sphere. (b) Streamlines for a fluid around a sphere spinning  clockwise.
(c) Air flowing past an aer ofoil.
vav = (v2 + v1)/2 = 960 km/h = 267 m s-1,
we have
v v vP
v2 1 2– /()=av
avΔ
ρ≈ 0.08
The speed above the wing needs to be only 8
% higher than that below. ⊳
9.5  VISCOSITY
Most of the fluids are not ideal ones and offer some
resistance to motion. This resistance to fluid motion
is like an internal friction analogous to friction when
a solid moves on a surface. It is called  viscosity.
This force exists when there is relative motion
between layers of the liquid. Suppose we consider
a fluid  like oil  enclosed between two glass plates
as shown in Fig. 9 .12 (a). The bottom plate is fixed
while the top plate  is moved with a constant
velocity v relative to the fixed plate. If oil is
replaced by honey, a greater force is required to
move the plate with the same velocity. Hence
we say that honey is more viscous than oil. The
fluid in contact with a surface has the same
velocity as that of the surfaces. Hence, the layer
of the liquid in contact with top surface moves
with a velocity v and the layer of the liquid in
contact with the fixed surface is stationary. The
velocities of layers increase uniformly from
bottom (zero velocity) to the top layer (velocity
v). For any layer of liquid, its upper layer pulls
it forward while lower layer pulls it backward.
This results in force between the layers. This
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 191⊳change of strain’ or ‘strain rate’ i.e. ∆x/(l ∆t) or
v/l instead of strain itself. The coefficient of
viscosity (pronounced ‘eta’) for a fluid is defined
as the ratio of shearing stress to the strain rate.
(9.16)
The SI unit of viscosity is poiseiulle (Pl). Its
other units are N s m-2 or Pa s. The dimensions
of viscosity ar e [ML-1T-1]. Generally, thin liquids,
like water , alcohol, etc., ar e less viscous than
thick liquids, like coal tar , blood, glycerine, etc.
The coefficients of viscosity for some common
fluids ar e listed in T able 9.2. W e point out two
facts about blood and water that you may find
interesting. As Table 9.2 indicates, blood is
‘thicker’ (mor e viscous) than water . Further , the
relative viscosity ( η/ηwater) of blood remains
constant between 0 oC and 37 oC.type of flow is known as laminar . The layers of
liquid slide over one another as the pages of a
book do when it is placed flat on a table and a
horizontal for ce is applied to the top cover . When
a fluid is flowing in a pipe or a tube, then  velocity
of the liquid layer along the axis of the tube is
maximum and  decreases  gradually as we move
towards the walls where it becomes zero,
Fig. 9.12 (b). The velocity on a cylindrical surface
in a tube is constant.
(a)
(b)
Fig 9.12  (a) A layer of liquid sandwiched between
two parallel glass plates, in which the
lower plate is fixed and the upper one is
moving to the right with velocity v
(b) velocity distribution for viscous flow in
a pipe.
On account of this motion, a portion of liquid,
which at some instant has the shape ABCD,
take the shape of AEFD after short interval of
time ( ∆t). During this time interval the liquid has
undergone a shear strain of ∆x/l. Since, the
strain in a flowing fluid increases with time
continuously. Unlike a solid, here the stress is
found experimentally to depend on ‘rate ofFig. 9.13 Measurement of the coefficient of viscosity
of a liquid.
The viscosity of liquids decreases with
temperature , while it increases in the case of gases.
Example 9.8 A metal block of area 0.10 m2 is
connected to a 0.010 kg mass via a string
that passes over an ideal pulley (considered
massless and frictionless), as in Fig. 9.13.
A liquid with a film thickness of 0.30 mm
is placed between the block and the table.
When released the block moves to the right
with a constant speed of 0.085 m s-1. Find
the coefficient of viscosity of the liquid.
Reprint 2025-26

192 PHYSICS⊳Answer  The metal block moves to the right
because of the tension in the string. The tension
T is equal in magnitude to the weight of the
suspended mass m. Thus, the shear force  F  is
F = T = mg = 0.010 kg × 9.8 m s–2 = 9.8 × 10-2 N
Shear stress on the fluid = F/A = N/m2
Strain rate = 
 
  = 
  = 3.46 ×10-3 Pa s
  ⊳
Table 9.2  The viscosities of some fluids
Fluid T(oC) Viscosity (mPl)
Water 20 1.0
100 0.3
Blood 37 2.7
Machine Oil 16 113
38 34
Glycerine 20 830
Honey – 200
Air 0 0.017
40 0.019
9.5.1 Stokes’ Law
When a body falls through a fluid it drags the
layer of the fluid in contact with it. A relative
motion between the different layers of the fluid
is set and, as a result, the body experiences a
retarding force. Falling of a raindrop and
swinging of a pendulum bob are some common
examples of such motion. It is seen that the
viscous force is proportional to the velocity of
the object and is opposite to the direction of
motion. The other quantities on which the force
F depends are viscosity η of the fluid and radius
a of the sphere. Sir George G. Stokes (181 9–
1903), an English scientist enunciated clearly
the viscous drag force F as
6F avη= π (9.17)This is known as Stokes’ law. W e shall not
derive Stokes’ law.
This law is an interesting example of retarding
force, which is pr oportional to velocity. W e can
study its consequences on an object falling
through a viscous  medium. W e consider a
raindr op in air . It accelerates initially due to
gravity. As the velocity increases, the retarding
force also increases. Finally , when viscous force
plus buoyant force becomes equal to  the force
due to gravity, the net force becomes zero and so
does the acceleration. The sphere (raindrop) then
descends with a constant velocity. Thus , in
equilibrium, this terminal velocity vt is given by
6πηavt = (4π/3) a3 (ρ-σ)g
where ρ and σ are mass densities of sphere and
the fluid, r espectively. W e obtain
vt = 2a2 (ρ-σ)g / (9η) (9.18)
So the terminal velocity vt depends on the
square of the radius of the sphere and inversely
on the viscosity of the medium.
You may like to r efer back to Example 6.2 in
this context.
Example 9.9  The terminal velocity of a
copper ball of radius 2.0 mm falling through
a tank of oil at 20oC is 6.5 cm s-1. Compute
the viscosity of the oil at 20oC. Density of
oil is 1.5 ×103 kg m-3, density of copper is
8.9 × 103 kg m-3.
Answer  We have vt = 6.5 × 10-2 ms-1, a = 2 × 10-3 m,
g = 9.8 ms-2,  ρ = 8.9 × 103 kg m-3,
σ =1.5 ×103 kg m-3. From Eq. (9.18)
   =  9.9 × 10-1 kg m–1 s–1⊳
9.6  SURFACE TENSION
You must have noticed that, oil and water do
not mix; water wets you and me but not ducks;
mercury does not wet glass but water sticks to
it, oil rises up a cotton wick, inspite of gravity,
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 193
Fig. 9.14 Schematic picture of molecules in a liquid, at the surface and balance of forces. (a) Molecule inside
a liquid. Forces on a molecule due to others are shown. Direction of arrows indicates attraction of
repulsion. (b) Same, for a molecule at a surface. (c) Balance of attractive (AI and repulsive (R) forces.Let us consider a molecule near the surface
Fig. 9.14(b). Only lower half side of it is
surrounded by liquid molecules. There is some
negative potential energy due to these, but
obviously it is less than that of a molecule in
bulk, i.e., the one fully inside. Approximately
it is half of the latter . Thus, molecules on a
liquid surface have some extra energy in
comparison to molecules in the interior . A
liquid, thus, tends to have the least surface
area which external conditions permit.
Increasing surface area requires energy. Most
surface phenomenon can be understood in
terms of this fact. What is the energy required
for having a molecule at the surface? As
mentioned above, roughly it is half the energy
required to remove it entirely from the liquid
i.e., half the heat of evaporation.
Finally, what is a surface? Since a liquid
consists of molecules moving about, there cannot
be a perfectly sharp surface. The density of the
liquid molecules drops rapidly to zero around
z = 0 as we move along the direction indicated
Fig 9.14 (c) in a distance of the order of a few
molecular sizes.
9.6.2 Surface Energy and Surface Tension
As we have discussed that an extra energy is
associated with surface of liquids, the creation
of more surface (spreading of surface) keeping
other things like volume fixed requires aSap and water rise up to the top of the leaves of
the tree, hair of a paint brush do not cling
together when dry and even when dipped in
water but form a fine tip when taken out of it.
All these and many more such experiences are
related with the free surfaces of liquids. As
liquids have no definite shape but have a
definite volume, they acquire a free surface when
poured in a container . These sur faces  possess
some additional  energy. This phenomenon is
known as surface tension and it is concerned
with only liquid as gases do not have free
surfaces. Let us now understand this
phenomena.
9.6.1 Surface  Energy
A liquid stays together because of attraction
between molecules. Consider a molecule well
inside a liquid. The intermolecular distances are
such that it is attracted to all the surrounding
molecules [Fig. 9.14(a)]. This attraction results
in a negative potential energy for the molecule,
which depends on the number and distribution
of molecules around the chosen one. But the
average potential energy of all the molecules is
the same. This is supported by the fact that to
take a collection of such molecules (the liquid)
and to disperse them far away from each other
in order to evaporate or vaporise, the heat of
evaporation required is quite large. For water it
is of the order of 40 kJ/mol.
Reprint 2025-26

194 PHYSICS
horizontal liquid film ending in bar free to slide
over parallel guides Fig (9.15).
Fig. 9.15 Stretching a film. (a) A film in equilibrium;
(b) The film stretched an extra distance.
Suppose that we move the bar by a small
distance d as shown. Since the area of the
surface increases, the system now has more
energy, this means that some work has been
done against an internal force. Let this internal
force be F, the work done by the applied for ce is
F.d = Fd. From conservation of ener gy, this is
stored as additional energy in the film. If the
surface energy of the film is S per unit area, the
extra area is 2 dl. A film has two sides and the
liquid in between, so there are two surfaces and
the extra energy is
S (2dl) = Fd (9.19)
Or, S=Fd/2 dl = F/2l (9.20)
This quantity S is the magnitude of surface
tension. It is equal to the surface energy per unit
area of the liquid interface and is also equal to
the force per unit length exerted by the fluid on
the movable bar .
So far we have talked about the surface of
one liquid. More generally, we need to consider
fluid surface in contact with other fluids or solid
surfaces. The surface energy in that case
depends on the materials on both sides of the
surface. For example, if the molecules of the
materials attract each other , surface ener gy is
reduced while if they repel each other the
surface energy is increased. Thus, more
appropriately, the surface energy is the energy
of the interface between two materials and
depends on both of them.
We make the following observations from
above:
(i)Surface tension is a force per unit length
(or surface energy per unit area) acting in
the plane of the interface between the plane
of the liquid and any other substance; it also
is the extra energy that the molecules at the
interface have as compared to molecules in
the interior .
(ii)At any point on the interface besides the
boundary, we can draw a line and imagine
equal and opposite surface tension forces
S per unit length of the line acting
perpendicular to the line, in the plane of
the interface. The line is in equilibrium. To
be more specific, imagine a line of atoms or
molecules at the surface. The atoms to the
left pull the line towards them; those to the
right pull it towards them! This line of
atoms is in equilibrium under tension. If
the line really marks the end of the
interface, as in Figure 9.14 (a) and (b) there
is only the force S per unit length
acting inwards.
Table 9.3 gives the surface tension of various
liquids. The value of surface tension depends
on temperature. Like viscosity, the surface
tension of a liquid usually falls with
temperature.
Table 9.3 Surface tension of some liquids at the
temperatures indicated with the
heats of the vaporisation
Liquid Temp (oC) Surface Heat of
Tension vaporisation
 (N/m)  (kJ/mol)
Helium –270 0.000239 0.115
Oxygen –183 0.0132 7.1
Ethanol 20 0.0227 40.6
Water 20 0.0727 44.16
Mercury 20 0.4355 63.2
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 195
A fluid will stick to a solid surface if the
surface energy between fluid and the solid is
smaller than the sum of surface energies
between solid-air , and fluid-air . Now ther e is
attraction between the solid surface and the
liquid. It can be directly measured
experimentaly as schematically shown in Fig.
9.16. A flat vertical glass plate, below which a
vessel of some liquid is kept, forms one arm of
the balance. The plate is balanced by weights
on the other side, with its horizontal edge just
over water . The vessel is raised slightly till the
liquid just touches the glass plate and pulls it
down a little because of sur face tension. W eights
are added till the plate just clears water .
Fig. 9.16  Measuring Surface Tension.
Suppose the additional weight r equir ed is W.
Then from Eq. 9.20 and the discussion given
there, the surface tension of the liquid-air
interface is
Sla = (W/2l) = (mg/2l ) (9.21)
where m is the extra mass and l is the length of
the plate edge. The subscript (la) emphasises
the fact that the liquid-air interface tension
is involved.
9.6.3 Angle of Contact
The surface of liquid near the plane of contact,
with another medium is in general curved. The
angle between tangent to the liquid surface at
the point of contact and solid surface inside the
liquid is termed as angle of contact. It is denotedby θ. It is different at interfaces of different pairs
of liquids and solids. The value of θ determines
whether a liquid will spread on the surface of a
solid or it will form droplets on it. For example,
water forms droplets on lotus leaf as shown in
Fig. 9.17 (a) while spreads over a clean plastic
plate as shown in Fig. 9.17(b).
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.17 Different shapes of water drops with
interfacial tensions (a) on a lotus leaf (b)
on a clean plastic plate.
We consider the thr ee inter facial tensions at
all the thr ee inter faces, liquid-air , solid-air and
solid-liquid denoted by  Sla, Ssa and Ssl , respectively
as given in Fig. 9.17 (a) and (b). A t the line of
contact, the surface forces between the three media
must be in equilibrium. From the Fig. 9.17(b) the
following relation is easily derived.
Sla cos θ  +  Ssl =  Ssa(9.22)
The angle of contact is an obtuse angle if
Ssl  > Sla as in the case of water -leaf inter face
while it is an acute angle if Ssl  < Sla as in the
case of water -plastic inter face. When θ is an
obtuse angle then molecules of liquids are
attracted strongly to themselves and weakly to
those of solid, it costs a lot of energy to create a
liquid-solid surface, and liquid then does not
wet the solid. This is what happens with water
on a waxy or oily surface, and with mercury on
Reprint 2025-26

196 PHYSICS
any surface. On the other hand, if the molecules
of the liquid are strongly attracted to those of
the solid, this will reduce Ssl and therefore,
cos θ may increase or θ may decrease. In this
case θ is an acute angle. This is what happens
for water on glass or on plastic and for kerosene
oil on virtually anything (it just spreads). Soaps,
detergents and dying substances are wetting
agents. When they are added the angle of
contact becomes small so that these may
penetrate well and become ef fective. W ater
proofing agents on the other hand are added to
create a large angle of contact between the water
and fibres.
9.6.4 Drops and Bubbles
One consequence of surface tension is that free
liquid drops and bubbles are spherical if effects
of gravity can be neglected. Y ou must have seen
this especially clearly in small drops just formed
in a high-speed spray or jet, and in soap bubbles
blown by most of us in childhood. Why are drops
and bubbles spherical? What keeps soap
bubbles stable?
As we have been saying repeatedly, a liquid-
air interface has energy, so for a given volume
the surface with minimum energy is the one with
the least area. The sphere has this property.
Though it is out of the scope of this book, but
you can check that a sphere is better than at
least a cube in this respect! So, if gravity and
other forces (e.g. air resistance) were ineffective,
liquid drops would be spherical.
Another interesting consequence of surface
tension is that the pressure inside a spherical
drop Fig. 9.18(a) is more than the pressure
outside. Suppose a spherical drop of radius r is
in equilibrium. If its radius incr ease by ∆r. The
extra surface energy is
[4π(r + ∆r) 2- 4πr2] Sla = 8πr ∆r Sla(9.23)
If the drop is in equilibrium this energy cost is
balanced by the energy gain due to
expansion under the pressure difference ( Pi – Po)
between the inside of the bubble and the outside.
The work done is
W = (Pi – Po) 4πr2∆r (9.24)so that
(Pi – Po) = (2 Sla/ r) (9.25)
In general, for a liquid-gas interface, the
convex side has a higher pressure than the
concave side. For example, an air bubble in a
liquid, would have higher pressure inside it.
See Fig 9.18 (b).
Fig. 9.18  Drop, cavity and bubble of radius r .
A bubble Fig 9.18 (c) differs from a drop
and a cavity; in this it has two interfaces. Applying
the above argument we have for a bubble
 (Pi – Po) = (4 Sla/ r) (9.26)
This is probably why you have to blow hard,
but not too hard, to form a soap bubble. A little
extra air pressure is needed inside!
9.6.5 Capillary Rise
One consequence of the pressure difference
across a curved liquid-air interface is the well-
known effect that water rises up in a narrow
tube in spite of gravity. The word capilla means
hair in Latin; if the tube were hair thin, the rise
would be very large. To see this, consider a
vertical capillary tube of circular cross section
(radius a) inserted into an open vessel of water
(Fig. 9.19). The contact angle between water and
Fig. 9.19 Capillary rise, (a) Schematic picture of a
narrow tube immersed water .
(b) Enlarged picture near interface.
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 197⊳ glass is acute. Thus the surface of water in the
capillary is concave.  This means that there is
a pressure difference between the two sides
of the top surface. This is given by
(Pi – Po) =(2S/r) = 2S/(a sec θ)
= (2S/a) cos θ (9.27)
Thus the pressure of the water inside the
tube, just at the meniscus (air-water interface)
is less than the atmospheric pressure. Consider
the two points A and B in Fig. 9.19(a). They
must be at the same pressure, namely
P0 + h ρ g = Pi = PA(9.28)
where ρ ρρ ρρ is the density of water and h is called
the capillary rise  [Fig. 9.19(a)]. Using
Eq. (9.27) and (9.28) we have
h ρ g = (Pi – P0) = (2S cos θ )/a    (9.29)
The discussion here, and the Eqs. (9.24) and
(9.25) make it clear that the capillary rise is due
to sur face tension. It is lar ger, for a smaller a.
Typically it is of the order of a few cm for fine
capillaries. For example, if a = 0.05 cm, using
the value of surface tension for water (Table 9.3),
we find that
h = 2S/(ρ g a)
  -1
3 -3 -2 -42×(0.073 N m )=(10 kg m ) (9.8 m s )(5 × 10 m)
  = 2.98 × 10–2 m = 2.98 cm
Notice that if the liquid meniscus is convex,
as for mercury, i.e., if cos  θ is negative then from
Eq. (9.28) for example, it is clear that the liquid
will be lower in the capillary !Example 9.10  The lower end of a capillary
tube of diameter 2.00 mm is dipped 8.00
cm below the sur face of water in a beaker .
What is the pressure required in the tube
in order to blow a hemispherical bubble at
its end in water? The surface tension of
water at temperature of the experiments is
7.30 × 10-2 Nm-1. 1 atmospheric pressure =
1.01  × 105 Pa, density of water = 1000 kg/m3,
g = 9.80 m  s-2. Also calculate the excess
pressure.
Answer  The excess pressure in a bubble of gas
in a liquid is given by 2 S/r, wher e S is the
surface tension of the liquid-gas inter face. Y ou
should note there is only one liquid surface in
this case. (For a bubble of liquid in a gas, there
are two liquid surfaces, so the formula for
excess pr essur e in that case is 4 S/r.) The
radius of the bubble is r . Now the pr essur e
outside the bubble Po equals atmospheric
pressure plus the pressure due to 8.00 cm of
water column. That is
Po = (1.01  × 105 Pa + 0.08 m  × 1000 kg m–3
    × 9.80 m s–2)
    = 1.01784  × 105 Pa
Therefore, the pressure inside the bubble is
  Pi  = Po + 2S/r
= 1.01784  × 105 Pa + (2 × 7.3 × 10-2 Pa m/10-3 m)
= (1.01784 + 0.00146)  × 105  Pa
= 1.02   × 105 Pa
where the radius of the bubble is taken
to be equal to the radius of the capillary tube,
since the bubble is hemispherical ! (The answer
has been rounded off to three significant figures.)
The excess pressure in the bubble is 146 Pa.
⊳
SUMMARY
1. The basic property of a fluid is that it can flow. The fluid does not have any
resistance to change of its shape. Thus, the shape of a fluid is governed by the
shape of its container .
2. A liquid is incompressible and has a free surface of its own. A gas is compressible
and it expands to occupy all the space available to it.
3. If F is the normal force exerted by a fluid on an area A then the average pressure Pav
is defined as the ratio of the force to area
AFPav=
Reprint 2025-26

198 PHYSICS
4. The unit of the pressure is the pascal (Pa). It is the same as N m-2. Other common
units of pressure are
1 atm = 1.01 ×105 Pa
1 bar = 105 Pa
1 torr = 133 Pa = 0.133 kPa
1 mm of Hg = 1 torr = 133 Pa
5. Pascal’s law  states that: Pressure in a fluid at rest is same at all points which are at
the same height. A change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted
undiminished to every point of the fluid and the walls of the containing vessel.
6. The pressure in a fluid varies with depth h according to the expression
P = Pa + ρgh
where  ρ is the density of the fluid, assumed uniform.
7. The volume of an incompressible fluid passing any point every second in a pipe of
non uniform crossection is the same in the steady flow.
v A = constant ( v is the velocity and A is the area of crossection)
The equation is due to mass conservation in incompressible fluid flow.
8. Bernoulli’s principle  states that as we move along a streamline, the sum of the
pressure ( P), the kinetic energy per unit volume ( ρv2/2) and the potential energy per
unit volume ( ρgy) remains a constant.
P + ρv2/2 + ρgy = constant
The equation is basically the conservation of energy applied to non viscuss fluid
motion in steady state. There is no fluid which have zero viscosity, so the above
statement is true only approximately. The viscosity is like friction and converts the
kinetic energy to heat energy.
9. Though shear strain in a fluid does not require shear stress, when a shear stress is
applied to a fluid, the motion is generated which causes a shear strain growing
with time. The ratio of the shear stress to the time rate of shearing strain is known
as coefficient of viscosity, η.
where symbols have their usual meaning and are defined in the text.
10. Stokes’ law  states that the viscous drag force F on a sphere of radius a moving with
velocity v through a fluid of viscosity is, F = 6 πηav.
11. Surface tension is a force per unit length (or surface energy per unit area) acting in
the plane of interface between the liquid and the bounding surface. It is the extra
energy that the molecules at the inter face have as compar ed to the interior .
POINTS TO PONDER
1. Pressure is a scalar quantity . The definition of the pressure as “force per unit area”
may give one false impr ession that pr essur e is a vector . The “for ce” in the numerator of
the definition is the component of the force normal to the area upon which it is
impressed. While describing fluids as a concept, shift from particle and rigid body
mechanics is r equir ed. W e are concer ned with pr operties that vary fr om point to point
in the fluid.
2.  One should not think of pressure of a fluid as being exerted only on a solid like the
walls of a container or a piece of solid matter immersed in the fluid. Pressure exists at
all points in a fluid. An element of a fluid (such as the one shown in Fig. 9.4) is in
equilibrium because the pressures exerted on the various faces are equal.
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 199
3. The expression for pressure
P = Pa + ρgh
holds true if fluid is incompressible. Practically speaking it holds for liquids, which
are largely incompressible and hence  is a constant with height.
4. The gauge pressure is the difference of the actual pressure and the atmospheric pressure.
P – Pa = Pg
Many pressure-measuring devices measure the gauge pressure. These include the tyre
pressure gauge and the blood pressure gauge (sphygmomanometer).
5. A streamline is a map of fluid flow. In a steady flow two streamlines do not intersect as
it means that the fluid particle will have two possible velocities at the point.
6. Bernoulli’s principle does not hold in presence of viscous drag on the fluid. The work
done by this dissipative viscous force must be taken into account in this case, and P2
[Fig. 9.9] will be lower than the value given by Eq. (9.12).
7. As the temperature rises the atoms of the liquid become more mobile and the coefficient
of viscosity, η  falls. In a gas the temperature rise increases the random motion of
atoms and η  increases.
8. Surface tension arises due to excess potential energy of the molecules on the surface
in comparison to their potential ener gy in the interior . Such a sur face ener gy is pr esent
at the interface separating two substances at least one of which is a fluid. It is not the
property of a single fluid alone.
EXERCISES
9.1 Explain why
(a)The blood pressure in humans is greater at the feet than at the brain
(b)Atmospheric pressure at a height of about 6 km decreases to nearly half of
its value at the sea level, though the height of the atmosphere is more than
100 km
(c)Hydrostatic pressure is a scalar quantity even though pressure is force
divided by area.
9.2 Explain why
(a)The angle of contact of mercury with glass is obtuse, while that of water
with glass is acute.
(b)Water on a clean glass sur face tends to spr ead out while mer cury on the
same surface tends to form drops. (Put differently, water wets glass while
mercury does not.)
Reprint 2025-26

200 PHYSICS
(c)Surface tension of a liquid is independent of the area of the surface
(d)Water with deter gent disolved in it should have small angles of contact.
(e)A drop of liquid under no external forces is always spherical in shape
9.3 Fill in the blanks using the word(s) from the list appended with each statement:
(a)Surface tension of liquids generally ... with temperatures (increases / decreases)
(b)Viscosity of gases ... with temperature, whereas viscosity of   liquids  ...  with
temperature (increases / decreases)
(c)For solids with elastic modulus of rigidity, the shearing force is proportional
to ... , while for fluids it is proportional to ..
. (shear strain / rate of shear
strain)
(d)For a fluid in a stead y flow, the increase in flow speed at a constriction follows
(conservation of mass / Bernoulli’s principle)
(e)For the model of  a plane in a wind tunnel, turbulence occurs at a ... speed for
turbulence for an actual plane (greater / smaller)
9.4 Explain why
(a)To keep a piece of paper horizontal, you should blow over , not under , it
(b)When we try to close a water tap with our fingers, fast jets of water gush
through the openings between our fingers
(c)The size of the needle of a syringe controls flow rate better than the thumb
pressure exerted by a doctor while administering an injection
(d)A fluid flowing out of a small hole in a vessel results in a backward thrust on
the vessel
(e)A spinning cricket ball in air does not follow a parabolic trajectory
9.5 A 50 kg girl wearing high heel shoes balances on a single heel. The heel is circular with
a diameter 1.0 cm. What is the pressure exerted by the heel on the horizontal floor ?
9.6 Toricelli’s barometer used mercury. Pascal duplicated it using French wine of density
984 kg m–3. Determine the height of the wine column for normal atmospheric
pressure.
9.7 A vertical off-shore structure is built to withstand a maximum stress of 109 Pa. Is
the structure suitable for putting up on top of an oil well in the ocean ? Take the
depth of the ocean to be roughly 3 km, and ignore ocean currents.
9.8 A hydraulic automobile lift is designed to lift cars with a maximum mass of 3000
kg. The area of cross-section of the piston carrying the load is 425 cm2. What
maximum pressure would the smaller piston have to bear ?
9.9 A U-tube contains water and methylated spirit separated by mercury. The mercury
columns in the two arms are in level with 10.0 cm of water in one arm and 12.5 cm
of spirit in the other . What is the specific gravity of spirit ?
9.10 In the previous problem, if 15.0 cm of water and spirit each are further poured into
the respective arms of the tube, what is the difference in the levels of mercury in the
two arms ? (Specific gravity of mercury = 13.6)
9.11 Can Bernoulli’s equation be used to describe the flow of water through a rapid in a
river ? Explain.
9.12 Does it matter if one uses gauge instead of absolute pressures in applying Bernoulli’s
equation ? Explain.
9.13 Glycerine flows steadily through a horizontal tube of length 1.5 m and radius 1.0
cm. If the amount of glycerine collected per second at one end is 4.0 × 10–3 kg s–1,
what is the pressure difference between the two ends of the tube ? (Density of glycerine
= 1.3 × 103 kg m–3 and viscosity of glycerine = 0.83 Pa s). [Y ou may also like to check
if the assumption of laminar flow in the tube is correct].
9.14 In a test experiment on a model aeroplane in a wind tunnel, the flow speeds on the
upper and lower surfaces of the wing are 70 m s–1and 63 m s-1 respectively. What is
the lift on the wing if its area is 2.5 m2 ? Take the density of air to be 1.3 kg m–3.
9.15 Figures 9.20(a) and (b) refer to the steady flow of a (non-viscous) liquid. Which of
the two figur es is incorr ect? Why ?
Reprint 2025-26

MECHANICAL PROPER TIES OF FLUIDS 201
Fig. 9.20
9.16 The cylindrical tube of a spray pump has a cross-section of 8.0 cm2 one end of
which has 40 fine holes each of diameter 1.0 mm. If the liquid flow inside the tube
is 1.5 m min–1, what is the speed of ejection of the liquid through the holes ?
9.17 A U-shaped wire is dipped in a soap solution, and removed. The thin soap film
formed between the wire and the light slider supports a weight of 1.5 × 10–2 N (which
includes the small weight of the slider). The length of the slider is 30 cm. What is
the surface tension of the film ?
9.18 Figure 9.21 (a) shows a thin liquid film supporting a small weight = 4.5 × 10–2 N.
What is the weight supported by a film of the same liquid at the same temperature
in Fig. (b) and (c) ? Explain your answer physically.
Fig. 9.21
9.19 What is the pressure inside the drop of mercury of radius 3.00 mm at room temperature ?
Surface  tension of mercury  at that temperature  (20 °C) is 4.65 × 10–1 N m–1. The
atmospheric pressure is 1.01 × 105 Pa. Also give the excess pressure inside the drop.
9.20 What is the excess pressure inside a bubble of soap solution of radius 5.00 mm,
given that the surface tension of soap solution at the temperature (20 °C) is 2.50 ×
10–2 N m–1? If an air bubble of the same dimension were formed at depth of 40.0 cm
inside a container containing the soap solution (of relative density 1.20), what would
be the pressure inside the bubble ? (1 atmospheric pressure is  1.01 × 105 Pa).
Reprint 2025-26

